Hello and welcome to Veterans of the Valley.
I'm Tom Turbiville.
It was March of 1919 when about a thousand military men met in Paris for what was known as the Paris caucus.
By the end of the meeting, they had a name, the American Legion.
It had been the brainchild of about 20 officers serving overseas in the American Expeditionary Force in France.
They had been charged with coming up with a way to improve troop morale.
One young Lieutenant Colonel Theodore Roosevelt suggested an organization for veterans.
Well, today, the American Legion numbers nearly 3 million members in more than 15,000 posts worldwide.
One of those posts, the Earl Graham Post 159 that serves the Brazos Valley.
Its commander is Charles Opersteny, lifelong resident of Bryan and a veteran who served, among other places, at the old Bryan Air Force Base during the years of the Korean War.
Charles Opersteny, welcome.
It's a pleasure to have you and a chance to talk about the American Legion.
First, I want to talk about your own service.
I know that when you entered, you were down at Lackland, you were at Randolph Air Force Base, and eventually right back up here to your hometown and to Bryan Air Force Base.
Sort of talk about those early years of your service.
Well, took a couple of weeks of basic at Lackland, and then, of course, finished up my basic at Randolph.
Since Randolph was a mother base of Bryan and furnished the cadre personnel, I was
put on orders to come to Bryan.
And of course, Bryan Field was pretty much desolate at that time.
So we had a lot of rebuilding program to do.
So I spent a lot of time doing carpentry work in the hospital so we could get it back up functioning again.
Right.
You were a medic.
I was a medic.
Bryan Air Force Base.
you educated me, located out where the Riverside campus is right now.
Bryan Air Force Base was quite active during World War II, but after the war ended 1944, 1945, it sort of shut down, but then got re-going again in the early 50s, just about the time that you arrived there.
Is that right?
Correct.
Right.
And talk about the base.
I think a lot of people who have been here for a little while
have heard of Bryan Field, Bryan Air Force Base, but they don't really know exactly what it was used for, a little bit of its history.
It was mainly for pilot training.
Talk more about that.
It was, yes, it was reopened for pilot training at that time.
They started out in T-28s, which was a propeller driven plane, had a tricycle landing gear.
And after they apparently learned to land
With the tricycle landing gear, then they moved up to the jet, which I think was the T-33, I believe.
And then this was their final learning phase.
And, of course, after that, then they were transferred to wherever the Air Force needed them.
I guess flying jets and so forth and et cetera.
You talked about the T-28.
I know you talked one time about a crash out at the, when you were there, out at the Air Force Base that required some assistance, medical assistance that maybe Bryan Air Force Base was not prepared to give at the time.
It was kind of hectic.
At that particular time,
weren't quite ready for flight status and unfortunately we did have a crash of a T28 and I was manually having to give traction to a person's head or neck because he had a fractured cervical vertebrae and
Pretty hard to do.
We didn't have the equipment to do these things.
But fortunately, the C-47 came in from San Antonio and we were able to transfer both the pilot and the student to, I guess, Lackland or whatever hospital it had for the military there.
You were at Bryan Air Force Base until about 1953, and then you were transferred to Newfoundland.
Talk about where you went there and what your job was and what that was like.
Again, I was a medic there, and I was at Pepperell Air Force Base, which was the headquarters for what is known at that time as the Northeast Command.
I thought I was going to Tule, Greenland, which is above the Arctic Circle.
They were opening up a hospital there, but somehow or another when the guy took out my Air Force identification code, he put me at Pepper, which I was very thankful for because
This was a nice-sized hospital.
We had essentially a physician of every specialty there.
We had an orthopedic surgeon, psychiatrist, ear, nose, and throat man, orthopedic surgeon, a urologist, and on down the line.
An x-ray or a doctor.
radiologists, so we could take care.
So people from that command, if they had problems at the smaller hospitals they could not take care of, they were then air back to our hospital, which in turn we took care of them.
If we were able to get them back to duty again, they would go back to their duty station.
If not, they would then transfer it back to the states.
So you stayed pretty busy there.
We were busy.
I enjoyed the tour of duty there.
It was nice and cool.
The hospital, we had a softball team, a great softball team, so I enjoyed that.
Indeed you did.
And it was there, it was during this time that you personally became interested in physical therapy, which became your life's work.
Talk about how that all came about.
Well, being that the Air Force did, the medics or the corpsmen did the heat treatments and exercise and so forth for the patients.
Of course, I became interested in physical therapy and my goal was when I got out of the service, I would finish up my college education.
which I did at Sam Houston State and then applied and was accepted at Herman Hospital School of Physical Therapy.
And I went there for a year and I enjoyed working with people.
Indeed.
Thoroughly enjoyed my work as physical therapist.
And you actually made a career out of it, some 43 years?
Correct.
In Houston.
A part of that time, I think you said a dozen years or so with the VA hospital, is that right?
Correct.
Is that right?
What was, at that time, you attended A&M for a couple of years, is that right?
Correct.
What was the campus like?
What was A&M like back then?
I know you played baseball for Marty Corot, right, outside of Kyle Field.
Well, the freshman coach was Mr. Anderson.
Yes.
And so I played freshman ball, did not play varsity ball.
Wasn't quite good enough.
But the campus was probably around six, close to 6,000.
It was all male, so no girls.
The campus now is so big, it's, you know, it's, I get lost on it.
Right.
You could go from Northgate over to Southgate on, I guess, Houston Avenue.
You can't do that now.
So the campus has really grown.
The school has really grown and, of course, continues to be a great school.
You grew up here in Bryan, over on the west side of Bryan.
You're a proud Stephen F. Austin Brucco.
Correct.
This has been your home practically your whole life, except for those four decades that you were down in Houston.
You weren't home, but you were close enough, right?
Well, we came back quite frequently.
I'll bet you did.
21 years now, you personally have been a member of the American Legion.
We're going to get specific about the American Legion, especially post 159 and talk about it.
We're going to see some photographs later on.
When you think about American Legion, obviously it's a passion of yours.
What do you think about it?
As far as obviously service is one of the first things that comes to mind.
Well, it's service.
Veterans helping veterans.
And that's our primary goal is to help a veteran who has a problem to get him either into medical care or into rehabilitation or somehow help him financially if we possibly can.
Or get him involved so he can have a job.
again but our we want to help the veterans here locally we want to also help our youth we're into a program of Americanism which we we strongly push and of course under the Americanism
We have the Boys State Program, which is a good program for kids to learn about government.
They can learn about our local state government.
We sponsor Boys Scouts.
We also present medals to the high schools.
and also the junior high schools for kids who push patriotism or citizenship.
We also have an autorical contest, and this is a nice contest which we wish that we could get more young kids involved.
Because if they win the state finals, there's a scholarship there.
So they have some money coming.
Then from there, they go to nationals.
So they can end up with quite a bit of money.
In scholarship, is that?
In scholarship money, yes.
Right.
So these are programs that we push.
And, of course, we consider ourselves as a family.
And the family is the American Legion, the American Legion Auxiliary, as well as the sons of the American Legion.
You all also, I know, have a very good relationship with the Veteran of Foreign Wars post.
Correct.
Many of their members are also your members, too.
Explain to folks, as you explain to me, what the difference is in the two organizations, VFW and American Legion.
The prime difference is the VFW, you have to have served in a foreign combat zone during a wartime period.
The American Legion, we were incorporated by the Congress as a wartime veterans organization.
So you could have served here in the States during the Korean War or World War II.
Not everybody goes into a combat situation.
You have to have support personnel to support those that are in combat.
So anyone that was in the service during a combat period
is eligible for the American Legion and certainly I would strive to encourage more veterans to belong to the American Legion or belong to a veterans organization.
We only represent maybe not even 10% of the veterans of Brazos Valley and I understand we have 10,000 plus veterans in the Brazos Valley and we need these veterans to join so we can encourage
legislation to help the veteran.
In fact, the American Legion did file suit against the VA on Agent Orange.
And at that particular time, the VA denied that Agent Orange had anything to do with health benefits.
Well, fortunately, the American Legion won the case.
And now we realize that those people that were in Vietnam during that time
Agent Orange could have had an effect upon some of their health problems.
About 800 members, 880 members.
880 members is roughly what we have, yes.
And you talked about that there's probably 10 to 12,000 maybe veterans in the Brazos Valley.
And a lot of the reason for that, that there are so many is because of Texas A&M.
So many old ags have come back here.
Yes.
Right.
Correct.
Exactly.
You talked about Boys State.
Talk a little bit more about that.
That's just a fascinating organization that our program that I've heard of, but probably don't know enough about.
And you all are one of the sponsors of this.
Yes.
I was so impressed.
And I went down and these these kids, you know, it was.
It was like two political parties.
They divide up and they were sitting there fighting each other.
It was fun to watch these kids actually toy with each other as far as their politics were concerned.
And one of the things that I was so impressed with, we normally invite the kids before they go.
And then they invite them after they've been to Boise State.
And one kid came back.
He said, well, I didn't really want to go.
But he said, I went.
And he says, not only did I go, but I try to run for everything.
So he got totally involved in Boise State and really enjoyed it.
That makes it all worth it right there.
It was worth it, yes.
We've got some photographs, photographs that I took when I visited out at the American Legion the other day and some old photographs that you supplied also.
And we're going to go ahead and go to those photographs right now and let Charles Apperstini talk about them.
You can look right over there.
And that is a very young Boy Scout, Charles Apperstini.
How old were you there?
Do you have any idea?
About 12?
13, 13, something like that.
It looks about that.
Got that tie on.
Got that hat cocked.
You can tell that that man's going to be a...
A man of service.
A little bit older here.
When was this picture taken?
This was probably in 1951 or 1952.
Probably 52 because it looks like I might have been an airman first class, which is three stripes.
You're top right there.
And this was nomination for, I think, a base airman.
So I represented the hospital group.
The others represented, you know, other branches of the Air Force there at Bryan Field.
That was taken here in Bryan at the Air Force Base.
Correct.
You referred a little bit about the American Legion and that it sponsored a baseball team.
Before you ever knew you were going to be a member of the American Legion, you played on the sponsored team, right?
Correct.
And that's your team.
What year would this have been?
This was probably 1947, I would think.
And your top row is second from the right?
Top row, second from the right.
Right next to the coach, it looks like.
This is a program that American Legion, we still continue to push.
Unfortunately, we don't have the leadership now that we've had
we've had people take advantage of our so our post does not sponsor a baseball team as of this date right but there are a lot of posts that do and it's I guess because we've had some with coaches I think some problems we have chose not to have one here
I remember when I was working up in the Dallas area as a sports writer.
Every summer, that's how we filled our sports pages was writing about American Legion high school baseball.
It was great.
Now, a lot of people are going to recognize some of these men.
This is a ceremony where you awarded a 60-year recognition to the American Legion.
Talk about who those folks are.
Why don't you go from your course, knelt there in the middle,
Who are these people left or right?
A lot of recognizable faces.
Okay, on the left in the red, there is Charles Stashney, whose father was a fireman for City of Bryan.
In fact, at that time, he might have been the only paid fireman the city of Bryan had.
It was an all-volunteer force at that time.
But Charles has been in the American Legion.
His father put him in, I guess, as soon as he went into the service, and he was in the Navy.
The next gentleman with a tie on is Jack Zubik, and he was in the Army and also was in the National Guard here in Bryan.
and his father, and he had a tailor shop out at College Station that made uniforms for Aggies.
The next gentleman is Travis Bryan Jr., who has been quite an influential person here in the city of Bryan.
I understand he was quite a golfer in his
It still is, I think.
And then the next person is Raymond Fickey, who is actually from the Curtin area, and he is in farming and ranching.
And the very next person with the Legion cap on is Perry Shirley.
He's a gentleman that I'm going to try to get on this show because you say he has quite a story of service.
Yes, he was involved in a lot of combat in Italy, and it would be nice if you had him on the program.
I think he received a couple of Purple Hearts.
In fact, I think when he was discharged, he might have been discharged with 100% disability.
Yes, sir.
But that didn't stop him.
He went back to work for the City National Bank, I believe.
If you're watching, Mr. Shirley, I'll be giving you a call.
We want to get you on the show.
And the person to the right is our adjutant, Don Simons, who...
at one time was our department commander here in the state of Texas.
He's a very knowledgeable person.
He was involved
Here at KAMU, I believe, with their sports program for R.C.
Slocum.
Right.
And, of course, Nealon.
A technical advisor to this show, as a matter of fact, also.
A very good man.
We appreciate it, Tom.
Right.
And, of course, Nealon is myself.
Right, right.
This is the outside of your post.
People that are not familiar with it, it's located out off of Highway 5.
21, just west of the bypass at the intersection of Waco there.
This is a shot, I think, of your auxiliary meeting room.
Of the auxiliary room, correct.
Right.
And the auxiliary, of course, is for spouses of American Legion members.
And what are we looking at there?
This is the commanders and the president.
I've forgotten which is which, but one is presidents of the auxiliary, the other is the commanders of our post.
I'm not sure.
They're recognized on... Recognized the past president.
That's a case that's there in the auxiliary room with some artifacts of the American Legion.
Correct.
Okay, we'll move on to the next picture.
You sell stuff, and you also have photographs of some of your legionnaires up there.
So what are we looking at there?
Well, the top row up there is the past commanders of our post all the way back to 1920 or whenever.
The post, I think, started in 1920 and dropped out for a year or two, according to Mr. Simons, but then started back up.
And I want to say, that's just a few of the pictures.
It goes all the way around the room.
Also underneath those cases that we saw before, things that you all sell, hats, American Legion hats and pins and whatnot.
This is your, you're very proud of this trophy case right out in your opening lobby.
What was in there?
We're very proud that we've had two department commanders from our post.
And we have a division commander
and a couple of district commanders, which is district is the immediate higher up from the post and then you have division and then of course you have department.
I think Don Simon's picture was in there and wasn't he a historian?
He was like a state historian?
He was a national historian.
Yes, he was a national historian.
I want to stay on this picture a while because this is Earl Graham.
Talk about Earl Graham.
Who was Earl Graham?
Well, Earl Graham was an early, well, he was in World War I and
Our post is named after him, and he is buried in the Bryan City Cemetery.
And normally posts are named after someone, and so our forefathers chose to name the post after him.
World War I veteran, and his photograph is well...
prominently displayed as it should be okay we'll move on to the next picture this I thought this was fascinating you took me out to the back of your place and you have a patio out there that you have activities with a big barbecue pit there in the back and you use this a lot but you want to invite other organizations or parties whatever to come in and rent this out right sure we would welcome
As you can see that it's a lot of space and everybody's looking for space.
So contact the American Legion and you can use this for your own party, for your own function.
Since we're on the patio, I would like to mention that on Flag Day, we do have a flag retirement ceremony.
So anyone who has a tattered flag, American flag, that they would like for it to be disposed of properly can bring it to our post.
We have a little box or a little...
stay in a box that you can put it in.
And on Flag Day, we will have a ceremony to properly dispose of or retire the American flag.
And you have it there on your back patio.
And that's just a fascinating place.
You talked about veterans helping veterans, and that's what you do.
And you do everything you can to help another veteran with who gets in problems, financial problems, whether it be rent, utilities.
And you try to the best of your ability to do that.
But you want people to understand you do not get any government subsidy.
That is correct.
Last year, we gave out around $2,600.
Of course, that is money that we have to come up with ourselves, and we don't mind helping the veterans that need help.
That's what we're for.
But this is your money.
This is money that you get from dues and your fundraising activities and such like this.
You also have honor guards.
that at the request of a family with a veteran who passes for their funeral service, you will give a 21 gun salute.
Talk about that service that you provide because I know it's very meaningful to families.
We're very proud of our honor guard and for some elderly
We have a lot of World War II veterans in there, so we're talking about someone who's up in age.
Also, our Korean.
We have a white shirt uniform with dark pants.
And we do provide military funerals for families that would like to have.
And so far, since we're starting up our honor guard again, we have been to over 100
funerals where we have provided a 21-gun salute, present the flag to the family member, and also play taps.
We talked about your close relationship with the VFW earlier, and that really comes to light at two specific days during the year, Veterans Day and Memorial Day.
That's when you all get together.
Instead of having two separate ceremonies, I guess you alternate having ceremonies on those days with the VFW?
Yes.
The days, like this year, we had Memorial Day.
Next year, the VFW will have, excuse me, we had Veterans Day this year at our post.
Next year, they'll have Veterans Day at their post, and we'll have Memorial Day at our post this coming year.
But yes, it's a joint program, and we do work together very closely.
And I know the commander of the VFW, Rick Alavarez, and we're good friends.
Indeed.
We've had him on the show, as a matter of fact.
Organizations like the American Legion, like the VFW, you can even go into organizations like Lions Club, Kiwanis Club, whatever.
They're simply not going to survive unless there's new blood there, unless there's new members, young, old.
And I know that in just our last minute here, you would like to tell folks, folks that are veterans to please consider joining an organization like American Legion.
By all means.
And I realize that this is a busy time of life for all of us.
And I grant you that you say, well, I can join, but I couldn't come.
But to me, it's very important that you join.
I joined and I never did go when I was young.
I was like a lot of young people.
I was busy working, trying to make a living for my wife and my children.
But to me, it's important to belong so we have numbers.
Congress will listen to numbers.
And if we can have numbers, as I said, it was nice that we were able to now point out that Agent Orange did create health problems.
And we need to keep the VA hospitals open.
So if with numbers, hopefully we can impress Congress.
And the American Legion will do that.
Charles Opersteny, thank you.
We're out of time.
Appreciate you being here.
Thank you very much.
It is imperative that if such service organizations as the American Legion or the VFW or the Lions or Kiwanis Clubs are going to sustain themselves, that new members come under their wings.
Involvement is the key.
And thanks to men like Charles Opersteny,
The American Legion does stand strong in our community.
Certainly, you've heard of the American Legion, and now you know more about them, and that was our purpose here.
Thanks to Charles Opersteny for his service, and thanks to all veterans, and thanks to our underwriter, First National Bank.
I'm Tom Turbiville.
Please join us next time on Veterans of the Valley.